THIS IS A WORK IN PROGRESS AND LIKELY HAS BAD ASSUMPTIONS AND ERRORS IN PROCEDURE.

# AmigaPCI

The AmigaPCI is a Motrola MC68040 based OCS/ECS* Amiga computer in the ATX form factor. It provides four AUTOCONFIG capable PCI slots for expansion purposes such as video, sound, ethernet connectivity, etc. Amiga OS and Kickstart 2.0+ is required for operation. 

* Original Chip Set and Enhanced Chip Set, respectively.

## 1. Overview

### 1.1 Processor

### 1.2 Expansion Busses

#### 1.2.1 PCI

#### 1.2.2 Video Slot

### 1.3 Amiga Chipset

The AmigaPCI must be populated with the Amiga OCS/ECS chips shown in table 1.3 in order to function properly. Reproductions in FPGA/CPLD may be used as well as the original equipment from Commodore. The Amiga chipset is required to enable basic functioning of the Amiga computer.

Table 1.3. Amiga chipset.
Name|Chip ID|Commodore Part Number(s)|Quantity
-|-|-|-
Agnus|8372A or 8375||1
Denise|8362 or 8373||1
Paula|8364||1
CIA|8520A||2
Gary|5719||1

### 1.4 Floppy Drives

### 1.5 Integrated Device Electronics (IDE)

The Amiga PCI includes a buffered, host terminated Gayle compatible AUTOBOOT* IDE port for hard drives and ATAPI** devices. The IDE port complies with the ATA/ATAPI Revision 4[[1]](#1) standard. The IDE port supports two devices (master and slave). For instructions on installing a new hard drive on Amiga computers, refer to the [Commodore Hard Drive User's Guide](DataSheet/Hard_Drive_Users_Guide.pdf). This includes the HDToolBox user guide and other useful information for setting up both IDE and SCSI devices.

The IDE cable header and the compact flash card adapter are on the same IDE port. They may be used simultaneously, but one device must be set to master, the other to slave. The IDE port only supports two devices, so when the CF card slot is in use, only one device may be installed on the IDE cable.

*AUTOBOOT requires Kickstart v37.300 or greater or compatible scsi.device in Kickstart.  
**ATAPI support included in Kickstart 3.1.4+. Older versions of Kickstart may require installation of third party ATAPI drivers.  

### 1.6 Human Interface Devices (HID)

The AmigaPCI support human interface devices (HID) via the two USB ports. Only keyboards and mice are supported. Support is supplied via the on-board STM32F205RET7 microcontroller, which translates the HID inputs into Amiga compatable signals. The mouse HID signals are shared with the JOY1 port (see 1.8.4) and are diode protected. This is to prevent +5V from any devices on the JOY1 port from feeding into the microcontroller.

### 1.7 Audio

The audio output is generated by Paula and run through the filter circuit as in the Amiga 4000. The audio output is supplied from a line level 3.5mm stereo jack. A CD audio header is included on the board.

### 1.8 Legacy User Ports

#### 1.8.1 Parallel

The parallel port is a female DB25 connector, which is stacked with the serial male DB25 connector.

#### 1.8.2 Serial

The serial port is a male DB25 connector, which is stacked with the parallel female DB25 connector.

#### 1.8.4 Legacy Joystick and Mouse Ports

There are two legacy joystick port headers on the board. JOY1 is for Amiga mice and joysticks. JOY2 is a joystick only input.

### 1.9 15KHz Video

### 1.10 Real Time Clock

The real time clock of the AmigaPCI is a modern device with I2C interface. Amiga OS bus requests for real time clock functions are translated through the Board Controller.

## 2. PCI Bus

The AmigaPCI is designed to comply with the PCI Local Bus Revision 2.3 specificiation. Each slot supports Universal and 5V cards, as defined in the PCI Local Bus Revision 2.3 specification. Like Zorro 2 and Zorro 3, PCI supports auto configuration of devices on power up. This allows, via some translation, for the use of Amiga AUTOCONFIG to configure devices at start up. This fits well with Amiga OS as each device is configured as a Zorro 3 device, which function natively with Amiga OS. 

By definition, the PCI Local Bus is a processor independent, 32 bit expasion bus. The AmigaPCI PCI Bus is implemented via a Motorola 68030 to PCI bridge using a PCI Controller ASIC concept. The PCI Controller Logic translates data requests from the Motorola 68030 and PCI devices in order that they may communicate in an effective manner. 

### 2.1 Endianness

Devices such as the Motorola 68000 (M68k) series processors are big endian devices. PCI devices, by contrast, are little endian devices. This means we must byte swap the address and data signals to provide a compatability layer between devices with different endianness[[1]](#1). This byte swap occurs in the PCI Controller Logic and is transparent to the devices. Any devices created for the AmigaPCI must be designed as little endian, as defined in the PCI Local Bus Specifications. Because PCI can mask any byte, we swap each byte individually.

Device|0x00|0x01|0x02|0x03|Endianess
-|-|-|-|-|-
M68k Data Bus|0*..7|8..15|16..23|24..31|Big
PCI AD Bus|7..0|15..8|23..16|31*..24|Little

*Most significant bit.

### 2.2 PCI Configuration

Each slot is capable of auto configuration via the Amiga OS AUTOCONFIG process. During configuration, each PCI slot, in turn, is polled to obtain the capabilities and address space needs of the target device. At startup, each PCI slot is polled by asserting the IDSEL signal. The IDSEL signal is approximately equivalent to the _CFGIN signal of the Zorro bus. However, unlike the _CFGIN signal, the IDSEL is asserted by a specific address bit during the address phase of a configuration command access[[2]](#2) (Table 2.2a). PCI configuration header Type 0 is supported by the PCI Controller logic.

Table 2.2a
PCI Slot|Address Bit
-|-
0|AD[16]
1|AD[17]
2|AD[18]
3|AD[19]

#### 2.2.1 AUTOCONFIG

During configuration, specifications such as the device manufacturer, product number, device capabilities, etc, are read from the device. Each PCI device is capable of supporting up to six base address registers (BAR0 - BAR5, between 0x10 - 0x24). At this time, the required address space for each of the six possible registers are determined and presented to Amiga OS for assigning of base addresses in the 32 bit 68030 address space. This is done through the normal Zorro 3 AUTOCONFIG procedure. However, the PCI Controller logic translates the needs of the PCI card and requests AUTOCONFIG resources in a manner that is understood by Amiga OS. As an example, if BAR0 requests 512k of configuration space, this request will be passed to Amiga OS as a Zorro 3 device requiring 512k of AUTOCONFIG space. Amiga OS will then assign a base address to this request. This assigned base address will then be programmed into BAR0 of the PCI device. This process repeats for BAR1 - BAR5 of the same PCI device. This procedure is then repeated for each PCI device installed further down the configuration chain. Once complete, each PCI device may be accessed by the assigned base address(es), just as any other AUTOCONFIG device.

One drawback to this process is the PCI device manufacturer ID (assigned by the PCI Special Interest Group) is non-exclusive with the Amiga OS manfacturer ID (as was assigned by Commodore Applications and Technical Support). This may result in misinterpretation of the manufacturer by Amiga OS. It is unknown at this time if this may result in hardware or software failures.

#### 2.2.2 ROM Vector

PCI devices may have onboard ROMs that contain additional information describing the device and may be used to enhance functionality, such as for auto booting. PCI ROMs may contain multiple images that support multiple architectures. During PCI configuration, the ROM address requirement is read from the PCI configuration header. This is then presented to the AUTOCONFIG process as a ROM Vector.

MORE DETAIL...HOW DOES THIS WORK?

### 2.3 Interrupt Handling

Each PCI slot has four interrupt signals, identified as _INTA, _INTB, _INTC, and _INTD. Single function PCI devices are only allowed to use _INTA. The remaining signals are only used in the event of a multifunction PCI device, with one interrupt line per pci function. As a hyptothetical example, a multifunction I/O device may use _INTA for a floppy drive interface, _INTB for a hard drive interface, _INTC for a serial interface, etc. For the purposes of the AmigaPCI design, _INTA, _INTB, _INTC, and _INTD are OR'd together and connected to _INT2. Driver design should look for assertion of _INT2 to signal an interrupt request from devices on the PCI bus. When an interrupt is asserted, the driver needs to poll its device on the PCI bus to determine if its device is asserting the interrupt.

### 2.4 Bus Mastering

Direct access activities are available to the MC68040 and PCI cards via bus mastering. When a device has mastered the bus, it has control of the entire AmigaPCI system and may directly access any valid address location. This is typically done for direct reading and writing of memory or direct control of chipset or other functions. The AmigaPCI bus arbiter accepts bus requests from the MC608040 and the PCI bus. Each slot on the PCI bus has a dedicated bus request signal. The bus arbiter will grant the bus to highest priority device when the current bus cycle is complete. See Table 2.4. In the event there is not pending bus request, the MC68040 is given explicit ownership until it begins a bus cycle or a bus request from one of the PCI devices is asserted.

Table 2.4. Bus arbitration priority.
Device|Priority
-|-
PCI Slot 0|0 (Greatest)
PCI Slot 1|1
PCI Slot 2|2
PCI Slot 3|3
MC68040|4 (Least)

#### 2.4.1 MC68040 Bus Mastering

When it is ready to take ownership of the system bus, if there is no bus cycle in progress, the MC68040 will assert _BR to indicate its intention. If appropriate, the bus arbiter will assert _BG in response so that the MC68040 may begin its bus activities. Once _BG is asserted by the arbiter, the MC68040 will assert _BB to indicate ownership of the bus. _BG is asserted until the MC68040 bus access is complete, indicated by negation of _BR. While posessing explicit ownership of the bus, the MC68040 may start a bus cycle at any time asserting _BR and _BB. Alternatively, the MC68040 may leave the bus idle when there are no bus operations necessary. In that case, _BR is negated and _BB is tri-state.

#### 2.4.2 PCI Bus Mastering

When a PCI device is ready to take ownership of the system bus, it will assert _REQx, where x is the slot designation of the device (0-3). Once any current bus cycle has completed (_BB is negated) the arbiter will assert _BB to indicate a bus operation is in progress. It will simultaneously assert _GNTx, allowing the requesting PCI device to take ownership of the bus and begin its operation. _GNTx and _BB will remain asserted until _REQx is negated. At that time, _GNTx will be negated and _BB will be negated.


## References
<a id="1">[1]</a>Data Movement Between Big-Endian and Little-Endian Devices. Freescale Semiconductor.  
<a id="1">[1]</a>Data Movement Between Big-Endian and Little-Endian Devices. Freescale Semiconductor.  
<a id="2">[2]</a>PCI Local Bus Specification Revision 2.3. PCI Special Interest Group. Section 3.2.2.3.5. System Generation of IDSEL. pp. 36-37.
